#summary A preview of Native Client in the browser, no plug-ins required
#labels Featured

Native Client is now built into the Dev channel of Google Chrome. This page tells you how to enable and use the integrated version of Native Client.  

*Note:* For now, the integrated version of Native Client has less functionality than the plug-in. If you want to see everything that Native Client can do, [Downloads download the tarball] and install the plug-in. For details of what's different about the integrated version, see [NativeClientInGoogleChrome#Known_issues Known issues].

*Contents:*
<wiki:toc />

=  How to enable Native Client in Google Chrome =

  # [http://www.google.com/chrome Download Google Chrome], if you don't already have it.
  # Subscribe to the [http://dev.chromium.org/getting-involved/dev-channel Dev channel].
  # Launch Google Chrome from the command line, adding *--enable-nacl*. On Mac and Linux, if you're using dev channel release 5.0.375.9 or 5.0.371.0, respectively (or an earlier version), also add *--no-sandbox*. On Windows, your command should look like this:

<blockquote><b><code>chrome.exe --enable-nacl</code></b></blockquote>

*Warning:* We recommend running Google Chrome with the --no-sandbox or --enable-nacl flag *only* for testing Native Client and *not for regular web browsing*.


= How to find and run examples and tests =

   # In any browser, bring up the [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/native_client/documentation/getting_started.html Getting Started] document. You'll follow some—but not all—of its instructions. Specifically:
      # [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/native_client/documentation/getting_started.html#software Get the software]. (Download the tarball, extract the files, and make sure you have the right version of Python.)
      # [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/native_client/documentation/getting_started.html#httpd Start a local HTTP server], if one isn't already running on your computer. <br /><br />
   # In Google Chrome, view the Browser Test Page, using *localhost* for the hostname. For example: <br /> <br /><a href="http://localhost:5103/scons-out/nacl-x86-32/staging/examples.html" target="_blank">http://localhost:5103/scons-out/nacl-x86-32/staging/examples.html</a><br /><br />
   # Click links to examples and tests to run them.


When Google Chrome is launched with the *--enable-nacl* flag, the integrated version of Native Client is used to run the examples and tests. Otherwise, the Native Client plug-in (if installed) is used to run them.

The following tests should work in the integrated version of Native Client:

    * Tests that have no audio or graphics<br /> The results of these tests should be the same as if you executed them in Google Chrome using the Native Client plug-in.

    * Mandelbrot performance test<br /> This works because all drawing is from JavaScript; Native Client is used only for calculations.

The following examples don't currently work:

    * Examples with graphics (except for the Mandelbrot performance test) <br />This includes everything in the Examples column except the SRPC hello world example.


For details about what each example and test contains, see the [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/native_client/documentation/examples.html Examples and Tests] page and the README files in the source code.


= Known issues =

    * Graphics and audio from native code don't work yet. Think of Native Client as a windowless plug-in. Proposed NPAPI improvements ([http://groups.google.com/group/native-client-announce/browse_thread/thread/3607403cbc165499 announcement], [https://wiki.mozilla.org/Plugins:PlatformIndependentNPAPI spec]) will provide access to video and audio.
    * Native Client in Google Chrome has been tested only on Windows. It probably doesn't work on Mac or Linux.
    * In some Dev-channel builds of Google Chrome, enabling Native Client requires disabling the Google Chrome sandbox.


= More information =

For information about the design and implementation of Google Chrome, see the [http://dev.chromium.org Chromium project website].