#summary Information about each release

This page summarizes the changes in each downloadable "tarball" of the Native Client project. To get the latest tarball for each platform, see [Downloads Downloads].

Between 0.2 and 0.1, the Native Client source hierarchy changed substantially, and the main development repository changed from an internal one to the [http://code.google.com/p/nativeclient/source/browse#svn/trunk nativeclient project's SVN repository].

==== Contents ====

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

== 0.2 release notes ==

This section describes the changes in each 0.2 release. You can find some more information in the `RELEASE_NOTES` file of the `nacl/googleclient/native_client/` directory (here's the [http://code.google.com/p/nativeclient/source/browse/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES latest version]).


=== July 9, 2009 ===

Includes all [http://code.google.com/p/nativeclient/source/list?start=343 changes up to r343]. Most significantly:

  * New expiration date: August 18
  * Slimmed down tarballs (they no longer have third-party SDK source)
  * Install and header file cleanup
  * Decoder updates anticipating 64-bit support (r326)
  * Support for new versions of GCC and binutils
  * Filter the user's environment prior to making it available to NaCl modules (r332)
  * New convention checker, !IncludeChecker, enforces that all includes using double quotes have  paths starting with limited number of allowed prefixes; also flags use of '..' in path and includes that are NOT in the top part of the file (r294)

=== June 19, 2009 ===

Includes all [http://code.google.com/p/nativeclient/source/list?start=280 changes up to r280]. Most significantly:

  * The getting started and build instructions have changed.
  * The source hierarchy has changed a great deal (and might still change).
  * Most of the directories under `scons-out` now have `-x86-32` added to their names.
  * The expiration date has _not_ changed — it's still July 8.

Some advice:
  * If you have bookmarks for the examples, update them to add `-x86-32`.
  * If you've been downloading Native Client frequently, you might end up with both old and new binaries under `scons-out` — for example, `scons-out/nacl` and `scons-out/nacl-x86-32`. To avoid problems, delete the non`-x86-32` versions of all the directories that contain binaries (that is, all the `scons-out` directories except `doc`).

== 0.1 release notes ==

Release notes for 0.1 distributions are in the `RELEASE_NOTES` file in the `nacl/googleclient/native_client/` directory.

*Note:* The date in the release notes might not match the date in this page. The date in the notes reflects when the notes were edited, which might be a few days before the release; this page lists the day the release went out.

You can find copies of the release notes in the SVN repository:

  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r201/data/docs_tarball/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES Release notes: June 1, 2009]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r168/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES Release notes: April 23, 2009]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r155/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES Release notes: March 30, 2009]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r134/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES Release notes: March 12, 2009]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r119/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES Release notes: February 11, 2009]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r67/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES Release notes: January 16, 2009]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r46/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES  Release notes: December 22, 2008]
  * [http://nativeclient.googlecode.com/svn-history/r15/trunk/nacl/googleclient/native_client/RELEASE_NOTES  Release notes: December 11, 2008]